’╗┐Computer Networks and Data 
Communication

Module 2

CS 212

Prof. (Dr.) SHAKTI KUNDU

Jan-May 2026



Module wise CONTENTS:
’ü« Module 1 - Introduction: An overview of networks, the Internet, services and protocols, RFCs 

and standards of Networking, Data communication & its components, types of data 
communication and communication channels. Key components of computer network; network 
devices; types of computer networks; network topology; reference models (Network 
Architectures) ŌĆō OSI & TCP/IP.

’ü« Module 2 - Physical Layer: Introduction and functions; types of transmission media ŌĆō guided 
and unguided; integrated services digital network (ISDN); asynchronous transfer mode (ATM).

’ü« Module 3 - Data Link Layer: Overview; sliding window protocols - Stop-&-Wait; Go-Back-N,
Selective Repeat; Error detection and correction; Hamming Code, LRC, VRC, CRC,
Checksum, Round Trip Time, Latency (Delay); Medium Access Sublayer: medium access
control (MAC) Addresses; Switching techniques - circuit, message & packet; Random Access
Protocols - Pure ALOHA, Slotted ALOHA, CSMA / CD, CSMA / CA; Controlled Access
Protocols ŌĆō FDMA, TDMA, CDMA; Channelization Protocols ŌĆō Reservation, Polling, Token
Passing; Ethernet (802.3 IEEE standard), Wireless Links, Wireless LAN - WiFi (802.11).

’ü« Module 4 - Network Layer: Introduction; address resolution protocol (ARP); internet protocol
(IP); internet control message protocol (ICMP); internet group management protocol (IGMP);
IPv4 addressing, representation of IPv6; IPv4 vs IPv6; Conversion IPv4 to IPv6; Routing
Protocols - routing information protocol (RIP), open shortest path first (OSPF); border gateway
protocol (BGP); Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP).

’ü« Module 5 - Transport Layer: Introduction; transport layer protocols - UDP & TCP, TCP
connection establishment; TCP connection termination; TCP congestion control. Application
Layer: Introduction ŌĆō features & functions; application layer protocols; Web and HTTP, Email,
P2P network, its types & applications.

’ü« Module 6 ŌĆō Network Optimization, Mathematical Models, Introduction Advance Computer
Networks, MANET, WSN, PCN, SDN, IoT.



’ü« Module 2 - Physical Layer: Introduction and functions; types of transmission 
media ŌĆō guided and unguided; integrated services digital network (ISDN); 
asynchronous transfer mode (ATM).



Physical Layer: Introduction

’ü« Physical Layer: The physical Layer is the bottom-most layer in the Open

System Interconnection (OSI) Model which is a physical and electrical

representation of the system.

’ü« It consists of various network components such as power plugs,

connectors, receivers, cable types, etc.

’ü« The physical layer sends data bits from one device(s) (like a computer) to

another device(s).

’ü« The physical Layer defines the types of encoding (that is how the 0ŌĆÖs and

1ŌĆÖs are encoded in a signal).

’ü« The physical Layer is responsible for the communication of the

unstructured raw data streams over a physical medium.



Physical Layer: Functions

’ü« Functions performed by Physical Layer

’ü« The physical layer maintains the data rate (how many bits a sender can
send per second).

’ü« It performs the Synchronization of bits.

’ü« It helps in Transmission Medium decisions (direction of data transfer).

’ü« It helps in Physical Topology (Mesh, Star, Bus, Ring) decisions (Topology
through which we can connect the devices with each other).

’ü« It helps in providing Physical Medium and Interface decisions.

’ü« It provides two types of configuration Point to Point configuration and
Multi-Point configuration.

’ü« It provides an interface between devices (like PCs or computers) and
transmission medium.

’ü« It has a protocol data unit in bits.

’ü« Hubs, Ethernet, etc. device is used in this layer.



Physical Layer: Functions

’ü« This layer comes under the category of Hardware Layers (since the

hardware layer is responsible for all the physical connection establishment

and processing too).

’ü« It provides an important aspect called Modulation, which is the process of

converting the data into radio waves by adding the information to an

electrical or optical nerve signal.

’ü« It also provides a Switching mechanism wherein data packets can be

forwarded from one port (sender port) to the leading destination port.



Types of Transmission media

’ü« 1. Guided Media: In this transmission medium, the physical link is created using

wires or cables between two or more computers or devices, and then the data is

transmitted using these cables in terms of signals. Guided media transmission of

the following types:

’ü« 1. Twisted pair cable: It is the most common form of wire used in communication.

In a twisted-pair cable, two identical wires are wrapped together in a double helix.

The twisting of the wire reduces the crosstalk. It is known as the leaking of a

signal from one wire to another due to which signal can corrupt and can cause

network errors. The twisting protects the wire from internal crosstalk as well as

external forms of signal interference. Types of Twisted Pair Cable:

’ü« Unshielded Twisted Pair (UTP): It is used in computers and telephones widely.
As the name suggests, there is no external shielding, so it does not protect from
external interference. It is cheaper than STP.

’ü« Shielded Twisted Pair (STP): It offers greater protection from crosstalk due to
shield. Due to shielding, it protects from external interference. It is heavier and
costlier as compared to UTP.



Types of Transmission media

’ü« 2. Coaxial Cable: It consists of a solid wire core that is surrounded by one or more

foil or wire shields. The inner core of the coaxial cable carries the signal and the

outer shield provides the ground. It is widely used for television signals and also

used by large corporations in building security systems. Data transmission of this

cable is better but expensive as compared to twisted pair.

’ü« 3. Optical fibers: Optical fiber is an important technology. It transmits large

amounts of data at very high speeds due to which it is widely used in internet

cables. It carries data as a light that travels inside a thin glass fiber. The fiber optic

cable is made up of three pieces:

’ü« Core: Core is the piece through which light travels. It is generally created using

glass or plastic.

’ü« Cladding: It is the covering of the core and reflects the light back to the core.

’ü« Sheath: It is the protective covering that protects fiber cable from the

environment.



Types of Transmission media

’ü« 2. Unguided Media: The unguided transmission media is a transmission mode in

which the signals are propagated from one device to another device wirelessly.

Signals can wave through the air, water, or vacuum. It is generally used to

transmit signals in all directions. Unguided Media is further divided into various

parts:

’ü« 1. Microwave: Microwave offers communication without the use of cables.
Microwave signals are just like radio and television signals. It is used in long-
distance communication. Microwave transmission consists of a transmitter,
receiver, and atmosphere. In microwave communication, there are parabolic
antennas that are mounted on the towers to send a beam to another antenna. The
higher the tower, the greater the range.

’ü« 2. Radio wave: When communication is carried out by radio frequencies, then it is
termed radio waves transmission. It offers mobility. It is consists of the
transmitter and the receiver. Both use antennas to radiate and capture the radio
signal.

’ü« 3. Infrared: It is short-distance communication and can pass through any object. It
is generally used in TV remotes, wireless mouse, etc.



Integrated services digital network (ISDN)

’ü« ISDN is employed as the network in data-link and physical layers but
commonly ISDN is often limited to usage to Q.931 and related protocols.
These protocols introduced in 1986 are a set of signaling protocols
establishing and breaking circuit-switched connections, and for advanced
calling features for the user.

’ü« ISDN provides simultaneous voice, video, and text transmission between
individual desktop videoconferencing systems and group
videoconferencing systems.

’ü« Principle of ISDN:

’ü« To support switched and non-switched applications

’ü« To support voice and non-voice applications

’ü« Reliance on 64-kbps connections

’ü« Intelligence in the network

’ü« Layered protocol architecture

’ü« Variety of configurations



Integrated services digital network (ISDN)

’ü« ISDN Interfaces: The following are the interfaces of ISDN: 

Basic Rate Interface (BRI)

’ü« There are two data-bearing channels (ŌĆśBŌĆÖ channels) and one signaling
channel (ŌĆśDŌĆÖ channel) in BRI to initiate connections.

’ü« The B channels operate at a maximum of 64 Kbps while the D channel
operates at a maximum of 16 Kbps.

’ü« The two channels are independent of each other. For example, one channel
is used as a TCP/IP connection to a location while the other channel is
used to send a fax to a remote location. In iSeries ISDN supports a basic
rate interface (BRl).

’ü« The basic rate interface (BRl) specifies a digital pipe consisting of two B
channels of 64 Kbps each and one D channel of 16 Kbps. This equals a
speed of 144 Kbps.

’ü« In addition, the BRl service itself requires an operating overhead of 48
Kbps. Therefore, a digital pipe of 192 Kbps is required.



Integrated services digital network (ISDN)

Primary Rate Interface (PRI)

’ü« Primary Rate Interface service consists of a D channel and either 23 or 30
B channels depending on the country you are in. PRI is not supported on
the iSeries.

’ü« A digital pipe with 23 B channels and one 64 Kbps D channel is present in
the usual Primary Rate Interface (PRI). Twenty-three B channels of 64
Kbps each and one D channel of 64 Kbps equals 1.536 Mbps.

’ü« The PRI service uses 8 Kbps of overhead also. Therefore, PRI requires a
digital pipe of 1.544 Mbps.

Broadband-ISDN (B-ISDN)

’ü« Narrowband ISDN has been designed to operate over the current
communications infrastructure, which is heavily dependent on the copper
cable however B-ISDN relies mainly on the evolution of fiber optics.
According to CCITT B-ISDN is best described as ŌĆśa service requiring
transmission channels capable of supporting rates greater than the primary
rate.



Integrated services digital network (ISDN)

’ü« ISDN Services:

Bearer Services

’ü« Transfer of information (voice, data, and video) between users without the
network manipulating the content of that information is provided by the
bearer network.

’ü« There is no need for the network to process the information and therefore
does not change the content.

’ü« Bearer services belong to the first three layers of the OSI model. They are
well defined in the ISDN standard. They can be provided using circuit-
switched, packet-switched, frame-switched, or cell-switched networks.

Teleservices

’ü« In this, the network may change or process the contents of the data. These
services correspond to layers 4-7 of the OSI model. Teleservices rely on
the facilities of the bearer services and are designed to accommodate
complex user needs. The user need not be aware of the details of the
process.

’ü« Teleservices include telephony, teletex, telefax, videotex, telex, and
teleconferencing. Though the ISDN defines these services by name yet
they have not yet become standards.



Integrated services digital network (ISDN)

’ü« ISDN Services:

Supplementary Service

’ü« Additional functionality to the bearer services and teleservices are
provided by supplementary services.

’ü« Reverse charging, call waiting, and message handling are examples of
supplementary services which are all familiar with todayŌĆÖs telephone
company services.



Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)

’ü« Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) is a networking technology that can
be used in many real-world scenarios, including:

’ü« Telecommunications

’ü« ATM is often used in the telecommunications industry because it can
transmit voice, video, and data over the same network. It's also a good
choice for commercial broadcasting due to its real-time transmission
capabilities.

’ü« Wide Area Networks (WAN)

’ü« ATM's high-speed data transmission capabilities make it a good
choice for WANs, especially as the backbone network.

’ü« Multimedia streaming, video conferencing, and telecommunications
infrastructure

’ü« ATM's ability to integrate voice, video, and data on a single network,
along with its prioritization features for real-time applications, makes
it a preferred choice in these environments.

’ü« ATM is a connection-oriented network for cell relay that encodes data into
small, fixed-size cells so that they can be transmitted over a physical
medium. It's a streamlined protocol with minimal error and flow control
capabilities, which allows it to operate at high data rates.



Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)

’ü« Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM): It is an International
Telecommunication Union- Telecommunications Standards Section (ITU-
T) efficient for call relay and it transmits all information including
multiple service types such as data, video, or voice which is conveyed in
small fixed-size packets called cells.

’ü« Cells are transmitted asynchronously and the network is connection-
oriented.

’ü« ATM is a technology that has some event in the development of
broadband ISDN in the 1970s and 1980s, which can be considered an
evolution of packet switching.

’ü« Each cell is 53 bytes long ŌĆō 5 bytes header and 48 bytes payload. Making
an ATM call requires first sending a message to set up a connection.



Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)
’ü« Subsequently, all cells follow the same path to the destination.

’ü« It can handle both constant rate traffic and variable rate traffic. Thus, it can
carry multiple types of traffic with end-to-end quality of service.

’ü« ATM is independent of a transmission medium, they may be sent on a
wire or fiber by themselves, or they may also be packaged inside the
payload of other carrier systems.

’ü« ATM networks use ŌĆ£PacketŌĆØ or ŌĆ£cellŌĆØ Switching with virtual circuits. Its
design helps in the implementation of high-performance multimedia
networking.

’ü« ATM Cell Format

’ü« As information is transmitted in ATM in the form of fixed-size units
called cells. As known already each cell is 53 bytes long which
consists of a 5 bytes header and 48 bytes payload.



Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)

’ü« Asynchronous Transfer Mode can be of two format types which are as
follows:

’ü« UNI ŌĆō Universal Network Interface - for communication between ATM endpoints
and ATM switches.

’ü« NNI ŌĆō Network to Network Interface - for communication between ATM switches.

’ü« GFC ŌĆō Generic Flow Control

’ü« VPI ŌĆō Virtual Path Identifier

’ü« VCI ŌĆō Virtual circuit Identifier ŌĆō numerical value that identifies virtual circuit in
computer network.

’ü« PT ŌĆō Penetrating Testing ŌĆō to check for vulnerabilities.

’ü« CLP ŌĆō Cell Loss Priority ŌĆō it indicates how a cell is treated if network is congested.

’ü« HEC ŌĆō High End Computing ŌĆō anticipate future needs, overcome current
challenges, and, effective use of system.



Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM)

’ü« Asynchronous Transfer Mode can be of two format types which are as
follows:

’ü« UNI (User Network Interface) Header: This is used within private
networks of ATMs for communication between ATM endpoints and ATM
switches. It includes the Generic Flow Control (GFC) field.

’ü« NNI (Network to Network Interface) Header: is used for communication
between ATM switches, and it does not include the Generic Flow
Control(GFC) instead it includes a Virtual Path Identifier (VPI) which
occupies the first 12 bits.



Prof. Dr. SHAKTI KUNDU

Computer Networks and Data Communication

2026